% !TEX root = thesis.tex

\chapter*{Main introduction}
\pagenumbering{arabic}

Nanoporous materials are material presenting nanometric cavities in their
structure. These cavities (or pores) and the associated high specific surface
area underlies crucial industrial applications, in particular for fluid
separation and storage, water purification, and heterogeneous catalysis. Two
classes of crystalline nanoporous material that particularly stand out today are
zeolites and metal--organic frameworks. Zeolites are natural and artificial
porous aluminosilicate known since 1756 and artificially synthesized since the
1940s. They enjoy a wide range of applications, in particular in the oil
industry as catalysts and in laundry detergents as softeners. Since the 2000s, a
new family of hybrid organic--inorganic crystalline nanoporous materials called
metal--organic frameworks emerged and sparked interest in the scientific
community. These new materials are based on metallic clusters, linked together
by organic linkers. This composition offers them immense structural and chemical
diversity and tunability: it is possible to engineer a new material with
specific pore size, shape, and chemistry by using different linkers and metals.
The relatively weak coordination bonds between the metals cations and organic
linkers create intrinsic structural flexibility in metal--organic frameworks,
which can be either local or extended to the whole material. Some of these
metal--organic frameworks --- grouped together under the soft porous crystal
appellation --- exhibit large scale structural transformations under external
stimuli such as temperature, pressure, adsorption or even light exposure.

Most if not all application of nanoporous materials are related to the entry of
another chemical species inside the material's pores. When the fluid is in the
gaseous state, the process is called adsorption, while for liquids it is called
intrusion. Both adsorption and intrusion have an effect on the physical and
chemical properties of the fluid confined in the pores. The opposite is also
true: the presence of the fluid inside the pores can modify the properties and
state of the surrounding material. Flexible materials are especially affected
and can undergo adsorption-induced phase transitions, resulting in macroscopic
phenomena like gate opening, breathing or negative gas adsorption. The coupling
between adsorption or intrusion and the deformations of flexible nanoporous
material is difficult to study, because it involves equilibrium between confined
and bulk fluids, as well as equilibrium between the different states of the
material.

I have been interested during my PhD in the molecular simulation of fluid
adsorption in flexible nanoporous materials. Molecular simulation tools can
speed up the development of new materials tailored to specific applications by
predicting the properties of materials before they are synthesized, lowering the
cost of screening thousands of material. Which property can be studied, and the
reliability of the corresponding precision depends on the techniques used to
model the systems of interest. Over the course of my PhD, I used multiple
techniques at multiple scales to look at adsorption and intrusion in flexible
porous materials, and the effects on both the confined fluid and the materials.
I used macroscopic models based on classical thermodynamics for the study of
co-adsorption of gases, classical molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo for the
intrusion of water and aqueous solutions in both rigid and flexible materials,
and \abinitio molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the molecular
organization of gases inside pores.

Unfortunately, current molecular simulations methods only allow looking at the
coupling between adsorption and deformations from a single point of view.
Molecular dynamics simulations can be used to describe deformations, but are
unable to simulate open systems, in particular the adsorption of particles in
chemical equilibrium with a reservoir. Monte Carlo simulation, on the other
hand, can describe such open systems and thus the adsorption phenomenon, but are
very inefficient for the study of collective deformations. I have thus been
interested in the Hybrid Monte Carlo simulation method, which can give us the
best of both Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations. I also approached
molecular simulation in general and Hybrid Monte Carlo in particular from the
point of view of their implementation in molecular simulation software, studying
various simulations techniques, their links to statistical thermodynamics and
efficient implementation strategy.

\begin{center}
    \pgfornament[width=6cm,color=CTsemi]{88}
\end{center}

This thesis presents my work on the molecular simulation of adsorption and
intrusion in flexible nanoporous materials, and is divided into six chapters. I
start by presenting nanoporous materials, in particular zeolites, metal--organic
frameworks and zeolitic imidazolate frameworks. I introduce the main
characteristics at the origin of their huge structural diversity. I also
describe the phenomena of adsorption and intrusion, how they relate one to the
other, and what effects they can have both on nanoporous solids and on confined
fluids. In a second chapter, I recall the basics of classical thermodynamics,
and then demonstrate how to use classical thermodynamics with the OFAST theory
to study co-adsorption in flexible nanoporous materials. My third chapter
establishes statistical thermodynamics and the molecular simulations methods we
can use to study chemical systems: molecular dynamics and Metropolis Monte
Carlo. I also briefly discuss different techniques used to model the
interactions between molecules, such as \abinitio methods and classical
force-fields. In chapter four, I derive the fundamental equations of density
functional theory from the Schr√∂dinger equation. I used density functional
theory to study the adsorption of nitrogen in \ZIF8, showing that the confined
fluid undergoes a reorganization linked to framework changes as the pressure
increases. The fifth chapter contains classical molecular dynamics studies of
the adsorption and intrusion of water in nanoporous solids. I studied intrusion
of electrolyte aqueous solutions in \ZIF8, and its impact on the fluid
structure, dynamics, and thermodynamics. I also looked at the confinement of
water in aluminosilicate nanotubes, and the corresponding impacts on structure
and dynamics. The last chapter exposes my work on the implementation of
molecular simulation software, and in particular the Hybrid Monte Carlo
simulation method, which is particularly suited to the study of adsorption in
flexible nanoporous materials. Finally, I give my conclusions on this work, and
identify some perspectives and challenges for future work.
